---
title: Nega biz Reactni ishlab chiqdik?
author: [petehunt]
---

Juda ham ko'p JavaScript MVC freymvorklar mavjud. Nega biz React ni ishlab chiqdik va nega uni ishlatishni xohlaysiz?

## React MVC freymvork emas. {#react-isnt-an-mvc-framework}

React bu moslashuvchi foydalanuvchi interfeyslarini qurish uchun kutubxona. U vaqt bo'ylab o'zgarib boradigan ma'lumotlarni taqdim qiluvchi qayta foydalaniladigan UI komponentlarni yaratilishini rag'batlantiradi.

## React shablonlardan foydalanmaydi. {#react-doesnt-use-templates}

An'anaga ko'ra, web ilova UI lar shablonlar yoki HTML yo'l-yo'riqlaridan foydalanilib quriladi. Bu shablonlar, o'zingizni UI ni qurishda foydalanishga sizga imkon berilgan mavhumliklarning to'liq to'plamini ta'kidlaydi. (Izoh: bu yerda shablonlar deganda, angulardagiga o'xshagan template ni alohida chiqarish nazarda tutilgan.)

React approaches building user interfaces differently by breaking them into
**components**. This means React uses a real, full featured programming language
to render views, which we see as an advantage over templates for a few reasons:

- **JavaScript bu moslashuvchan, qudratli dasturlash tili** mavhumliklarni yaratish qobiliyati bilan. Bu katta ilovalarda nihoyatda muhimdir.
- By unifying your markup with its corresponding view logic, React can actually
  make views **easier to extend and maintain**.
- By baking an understanding of markup and content into JavaScript, there's
  **no manual string concatenation** and therefore less surface area for XSS
  vulnerabilities.

We've also created [JSX](/docs/jsx-in-depth.html), an optional syntax
extension, in case you prefer the readability of HTML to raw JavaScript.

## Reactive updates are dead simple. {#reactive-updates-are-dead-simple}

React really shines when your data changes over time.

In a traditional JavaScript application, you need to look at what data changed
and imperatively make changes to the DOM to keep it up-to-date. Even AngularJS,
which provides a declarative interface via directives and data binding [requires
a linking function to manually update DOM nodes](https://code.angularjs.org/1.0.8/docs/guide/directive#reasonsbehindthecompilelinkseparation).

React takes a different approach.

When your component is first initialized, the `render` method is called,
generating a lightweight representation of your view. From that representation,
a string of markup is produced, and injected into the document. When your data
changes, the `render` method is called again. In order to perform updates as
efficiently as possible, we diff the return value from the previous call to
`render` with the new one, and generate a minimal set of changes to be applied
to the DOM.

> The data returned from `render` is neither a string nor a DOM node -- it's a
> lightweight description of what the DOM should look like.

Biz bu jarayonni **reconciliation ya'ni murosa** deb ataymiz. Actiondagi reconciliation ning misolini ko'rish uchun [Bu jsFiddle](http://jsfiddle.net/2h6th4ju/) ni tekshirib ko'ring.

Re-render yoki qayta chizishning juda tezligi uchun (TodoMVC uchun 1ms atrofida), dasturchi ma'lumotlar biriktiruvchilar[data binding] ni aniq ko'rsatishiga xojat yo'q. Ushbu yondashuv ilovalarni osonroq yaratishini aniqladik.

## HTML is just the beginning. {#html-is-just-the-beginning}

Because React has its own lightweight representation of the document, we can do
some pretty cool things with it:

- Facebook has dynamic charts that render to `<canvas>` instead of HTML.
- Instagram bu butunlay React va `Backbone.Router` 
 bilan qurilgan "yagona sahifali[single page]" veb ilovadir. Dizaynerlar muntazam ravishda React kodga JSX yordamida hissasini qo'shishadi.
- We've built internal prototypes that run React apps in a web worker and use
  React to drive **native iOS views** via an Objective-C bridge.
- You can run React
  [on the server](https://github.com/petehunt/react-server-rendering-example)
  for SEO, performance, code sharing and overall flexibility.
- Events behave in a consistent, standards-compliant way in all browsers
  (including IE8) and automatically use
  [event delegation](http://davidwalsh.name/event-delegate).

Head on over to [https://reactjs.org](https://reactjs.org) to check out what we have
built. Our documentation is geared towards building apps with the framework,
but if you are interested in the nuts and bolts
[get in touch](/support.html) with us!

Thanks for reading!
